---
title: Drug Decriminalization
date: "2019-09-20"
---

A Critique on Husak’s Argument
This essay is my attempt to answer the popular question of whether or not to decriminalize drug use.  Firstly I will be presenting a popular argument for drug decriminalization by Douglas Husak. Afterward I will offer what I believe is the strongest counterargument to Husak’s proposition. I will achieve this by questioning Husak’s rationale and offer counter examples to his notions. Finally I will personally reflect and comment in the final paragraph on which argument actually succeeds and the rationale behind it. Before I cite Husak’s argument, we must define the terms of what Husak truly means when he advocates for drug decriminalization. My counterargument will also utilize these terms in order to maintain congruence.
To start , Husak concedes that the blanket term “drugs” is indeed a hazy one as there is quite a spectrum between types and that a deeper analysis for decriminalization would follow drug by drug. However his argument does not depend on the type, so he defines drugs as “all substances we agree to be drugs” (2). Next, decriminalization in his view offers that only the use of the drug would be decriminalized and subsequently does not afford freedoms to its possession or sale. This legalization must hold no form of punishment, as Husak believes there should be zero modes of sanctions (such as fines) for mere use. Accordingly, decriminalization when enacted will ultimately hinge on whether it is used recreationally, religiously, or medically. For the sake of time, we will be considering decriminalization for when the use is recreational (the user takes a drug in order to reach a positive state of euphoria). Lastly, Husak is defending his premise despite there not being a definitive theory of criminalization. The only principle that is agreed upon holds that no state should punish a person for actions which are morally permissible. 
Now that we have the conditions defined, let us discuss Husak’s argument, one that is based on the premise that there are no defensible reasons for criminalization. Husak has taken this route since it does not rely on any disputed empirical or normative assumptions like contemporary utilitarian or libertarian arguments. He has “yet to hear a persuasive case for punishing people merely for using any existing drug” (Husak 341). He then lists 3 commonly heard arguments defending criminalization; first, being that drugs hinder childhood development; second, that they are unhealthy; and third, are correlated with violent behavior/crime. He admits that each must be reviewed meticulously, but in his perception even when considered in tandem, they do not justify punishment. He only affirms being in favor of punishment for the usage of imagined drugs such as the one in that turned Jekyll into the murder crazed Hyde. Since the action of consuming drugs itself is not inherently morally wrong, the state has no right to punish it. He discusses how most use is innocuous - being that many people do not cause any harm when taking substances for recreational purposes. Also the population of users is indistinguishable from the population of abstainers when in terms concerning criminalization. Husak himself says if he injected heroin, at most he is only risking “harm to myself and/or to others''. He claims there is no reason to criminalize the user for creating these risks. He also raises points about both alcohol and tobacco use are left unpunished yet having no observable differences between them and drugs. Given these conditions, Husak makes it seemingly clear that punishment is foolish.
Husak’s argument makes a lot of assumptions that I do not particularly agree with, and some of his reasoning can be questionable. In his essay, he never actually justified why the three arguments for criminalization fail, but just made it seem like a given. Even on the surface I believe that his argument is faulty as he considers drug usage to result in binary outcomes. Where either the user either causes untenable violations of rights to others, or are just harmless enjoyers. He fails to mention how it can affect friends, family, or loved ones. Just because the usage of a certain drug doesn’t alter the user into a serial killer doesn’t say it can’t damage intimate relationships, cause crime, or put strain on the healthcare system. There is substantial research indicating that drug users are in fact more likely to commit crime than nonusers (3). These reasons alone could be defended to limit the free utilization of drugs. Nonetheless, I also believe Husak’s inherent reasoning is a bit flawed as even if the use of drugs is treated as morally permissible, the state is still justified in prohibiting an action that can cause harm barring it is not arbitrary. For example, speeding is illegal in the U.S., yet we do not have philosophers passionately urging for its decriminalization. Wearing a seatbelt, another morally permissible action, is also mandated because the repercussions of not forcing people to wear them would cause more deaths. Similarly taking drugs should be treated as such, where drugs that have been shown to negatively influence behavior/cognitive function should be banned from consumption. Laws must be in place regulating these actions even if they are “morally permissible” as the uncertainty generated without their existence would inevitably precipitate more unfavorable outcomes. Although ingesting mind altering drugs such as bath salts, certainly cannot be considered a morally permissible action. Lastly, with so many cultures encompassing a single nation, how would a state make a conclusion on what is actually morally permissible. Arguing that in order to criminalize something it must be dependent on a vague and most likely contested term such as being “morally impermissible” is a rash judgement. A devout Christian would hold many more actions as impermissible than what a progressive atheist would account. Are either person to be told that their beliefs are inherently wrong, or shouldn't ours laws be on the basis of more objective stature? Consequently, my argument thereby refutes Husak’s by first exposing gaps in his logic, then by providing counterexamples of criminalized morally permissible actions, and subsequently questioning his theory on criminalization in regards to moral relativism.
Ultimately it is hard to say which argument succeeds as Husak’s argument is self admittedly left inconclusive. However Husak makes quite a few inferences which I think we do not have the privilege to make. We cannot just assume that most drug use only impacts the user as it can most definitely affect a multitude of things. Furthermore, I think that the idea that in order to criminalize something it must be morally impermissible is a bit erroneous in this day and age. Besides the fact it is commonly accepted that some “morally permissible” actions ought to be punished in order to maintain order in our day to day lives. It is practically impossible to come up with a definite agreement on morality especially in countries such as the U.S. Therefore I think the arguments I put forth trump Husak’s as his reasoning relies not only on a problematic term, but also does not account for other possible results from use. We must account for many other variables when we make our decisions. There are plenty of other arguments for decriminalization that offer more concrete reasoning. One being an utilitarian approach as it provides a realistic argument. Common defenses maintain how the war on drugs has actually done the reverse of its purpose. Or how Portugal has actually improved their society post decriminalization with it being correlated to lower homicide and drug mortality rates (1). Especially in a polarized climate that is so inherently present in the U.S, tangible evidence is needed to justify the decriminalization of drugs or else it would never get passed into law.
In conclusion, I think Husak fails in arguing for decriminalization and would be better off  appealing in a consequentialist manner. 
Works Cited:
